[State Observability] pre-alpha documentation (#26560)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-observability/state/state-api.rst

.. _state-api-overview-ref:

Monitoring ray states
=====================

.. tip:: We'd love to hear your feedback on using Ray state APIs - `feedback form <https://forms.gle/gh77mwjEskjhN8G46>`_!

Ray state APIs allow users to conveniently access the current state (snapshot) of Ray through CLI or Python SDK.

.. tip:: APIs are pre-alpha and under active development. APIs are subject to change and not stable across versions.

Getting Started
---------------

Run any workload. In this example, you will use the following script that runs 2 tasks and creates 2 actors.

.. code-block:: python

    import ray
    import time

    ray.init(num_cpus=4)

    @ray.remote
    def task_running_300_seconds():
        print("Start!")
        time.sleep(300)
    
    @ray.remote
    class Actor:
        def __init__(self):
            print("Actor created")
    
    # Create 2 tasks
    tasks = [task_running_300_seconds.remote() for _ in range(2)]

    # Create 2 actors
    actors = [Actor.remote() for _ in range(2)]

    ray.get(tasks)

> Now, let's see the summarized states of tasks. It takes some time to query all data, so if it doesn't return the output immediately, retry the command.

Reviewer: With this small workload, it should return quite quickly. Should we mention it is only expected to be slow when querying large number of entities maybe at a later section? 

```suggestion
Now, let's see the summarized states of tasks. 
```

.. code-block:: bash

    ray summary tasks

.. code-block:: text

    ======== Tasks Summary: 2022-07-22 08:54:38.332537 ========
    Stats:
    ------------------------------------
    total_actor_scheduled: 2
    total_actor_tasks: 0
    total_tasks: 2

    Table (group by func_name):
    ------------------------------------
        FUNC_OR_CLASS_NAME        STATE_COUNTS    TYPE
    0   task_running_300_seconds  RUNNING: 2      NORMAL_TASK
    1   Actor.__init__            FINISHED: 2     ACTOR_CREATION_TASK

Let's list all running tasks.

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list tasks

.. code-block:: text

    ======== List: 2022-07-22 08:56:37.570942 ========
    Stats:
    ------------------------------
    Total: 4

    Table:
    ------------------------------

>        FUNC_OR_CLASS_NAME        NAME                         SCHEDULING_STATE    TASK_ID                                           TYPE

Reviewer: <img width="876" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180498397-f32d4271-4958-4a54-9a72-2a27c496015e.png">

Not really relate to this PR, more of a cosmetic minor point. Should we change the default columns set for task to exclude "NAME" column? On a narrow terminal or window like this, it is not showing up too well.

Reviewer: should we use `ray list actors` and `ray get actors xxx` for the list results example?

    0  task_running_300_seconds  task_running_300_seconds()   RUNNING             16310a0f0a45af5cffffffffffffffffffffffff01000000  NORMAL_TASK
    1  task_running_300_seconds  task_running_300_seconds()   RUNNING             c8ef45ccd0112571ffffffffffffffffffffffff01000000  NORMAL_TASK
    2  Actor.__init__            Actor.__init__()             FINISHED            ffffffffffffffff823ef6de3c08a9cb1469d36b01000000  ACTOR_CREATION_TASK
    3  Actor.__init__            Actor.__init__()             FINISHED            ffffffffffffffff971bfac3ca40ca548209005301000000  ACTOR_CREATION_TASK

You can get the state of a single task using the get API. 

.. code-block:: bash

>     ray get tasks <TASK_ID>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ray get tasks 32d950ec0ccf9d2affffffffffffffffffffffff01000000
```

.. code-block:: text

    ---
    func_or_class_name: task_running_300_seconds
    language: PYTHON
    name: task_running_300_seconds()
    required_resources:
        CPU: 1.0
    runtime_env_info:
        runtime_env_config:
            eager_install: true
            setup_timeout_seconds: 600
        serialized_runtime_env: '{}'
    scheduling_state: RUNNING
    task_id: 32d950ec0ccf9d2affffffffffffffffffffffff01000000
    type: NORMAL_TASK

You can also access logs through ``ray logs`` API.

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list actors
    ray logs --actor-id <ACTOR_ID>

.. code-block:: text

    --- Log has been truncated to last 1000 lines. Use `--tail` flag to toggle. ---

    :actor_name:Actor
    Actor created

> Key Concepts

Reviewer: should we promote this to the beginning of this page?

------------

> Ray state APIs allow you to access **states** of **resources** through **summary**, **list**, and **get** APIs.

Reviewer: mention log as well? for completeness?

- **states**: The state of the cluster of corresponding resources. States consist of immutable metadata (e.g., actor's name) and mutable states (e.g., actor's scheduling state or pid).
- **resources**: Resources created by Ray. E.g., actors, tasks, objects, placement groups, and etc. 
- **summary**: API to return the summarized view of resources.
- **list**: API to return every individual entity of resources.
- **get**: API to return a single entity of resources in detail.

Summary 
-------
Return the summarized information of the given Ray resource (objects, actors, tasks).
It is recommended to start monitoring states through summary APIs first. When you find anomalies
(e.g., actors running for a long time, tasks that are not scheduled for a long time),
you can use ``list`` or ``get`` APIs to get more details for an individual abnormal resource.

> E.g. Summarize all actors (e.g. number of alive actors, different actor classes, etc)

Reviewer: is there a way we make this a header so that it appears in the content section? What do y'all think? So people get a sense of what the APIs could do w/o reading all of them. 

<img width="220" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180499700-5ec06735-fbb7-4c2b-9e2b-80ba800d6cfd.png">

Author: Looks like we don't do this throughout the document. Top level headers only include new document, not headers of each doc. (and I couldn't find a way to convert it..). Will just keep it as it is..

.. code-block:: bash

    ray summary actors

E.g. Summarize all tasks (e.g. task count in different states, type of different tasks, etc)  

.. code-block:: bash

    ray summary tasks

E.g. Summarize all objects (e.g. total number of objects, size of all objects, etc) 

.. code-block:: bash

    # To get callsite info, set env variable `RAY_record_ref_creation_sites=1` when starting the ray cluster
    # RAY_record_ref_creation_sites=1 ray start --head
    ray summary objects 

List
----

> Get a list of resources, possible resources include: 

Reviewer: <img width="967" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180499496-8bc8354c-b82b-454f-b606-822c37bf3309.png">
need new line?

:ref:`Actors <actor-guide>`
:ref:`Tasks <ray-remote-functions>`
:ref:`Objects <objects-in-ray>`
:ref:`Jobs <jobs-overview>`
:ref:`Placement Groups <ray-placement-group-doc-ref>`
:ref:`Nodes (Ray worker nodes)`
:ref:`Workers (Ray worker processes)`
:ref:`Runtime environments <runtime-environments>`

E.g. List all nodes

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list nodes 

E.g. List all placement groups

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list placement-groups

> Listing resources with one or multiple filters 

Reviewer: This is not rendered well. 
<img width="922" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180499847-f7d82521-bc95-49da-a339-a6c7a7f1625b.png">

E.g. List running tasks

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list tasks -f scheduling_state=RUNNING

E.g. List non-running tasks

.. code-block:: bash

    ray list tasks -f shceduling_state!=RUNNING

Get
---

E.g. Get a task info

.. code-block:: bash

    ray get tasks <worker_id> 

E.g. Get a node info

.. code-block:: bash

    ray get nodes <node_id> 

Logs
----

State API also allows you to conveniently access ray logs. Note that you cannot access the logs from a dead node.
By default, the API prints log from a head node.

E.g. Get all retrievable log file names

.. code-block:: bash

    ray logs 

E.g. Get a particular log file from a node

.. code-block:: bash

    # You could get the node id / node ip from `ray list nodes` 
    ray logs gcs_server.out --node-id <XYZ> 

E.g. Stream a log file from a node

.. code-block:: bash

    ray logs -f raylet.out --node-ip 172.31.47.143

E.g. Stream actor log with actor id 

.. code-block:: bash

    # You could use ray list actors to get the actor ids
    ray logs --actor-id=<XXX>

E.g. Stream log from a pid 

.. code-block:: bash

    ray logs --pid=<XXX> --follow

Failure Semantics
-----------------

> The state APIs don't guarantee to return the correct snapshot of the cluster all the time. By default,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state APIs don't guarantee to return a consistent/complete snapshot of the cluster all the time. By default,
```

> all Python SDKs raise an exception when there's a missing output from the API. And CLI returns a partial result

Reviewer: Oh right - we need to talk about Python here also I think. Maybe throw in some examples. 

Or maybe we could do this for all the examples (CLI and Python vs SSH and HTTPS) : 
<img width="795" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180500371-0608bc17-d5da-4b34-8edb-fe00ea9da60f.png">

and provides warning messages. Here are cases where there can be missing output from the API.

Query Failures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

State APIs query "data sources" (e.g., GCS, raylets, etc.) to obtain and build the snapshot of the cluster.
However, data sources are sometimes unavailable (e.g., the source is down or overloaded). In this case, APIs

> will return the partial snapshot of the cluster, and users are informed that the output is incorrect through a warning message.

Reviewer 2: incorrect -> incomplete

All warnings are printed through Python's ``warnings`` library, and they can be suppressed.

Data Truncation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When the returned data is too large (> 100K), state APIs truncate the output data to ensure system stability.

Reviewer 2: size or number of rows? need a bit clarity

> Currently, there's no way to control truncated data. In this case, it is recommended to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there's no way to avoid truncated data if the query result is too large . In this case, it is recommended to
```

> reduce the output size using a ``--filter`` option. When truncation happens it will be informed through Python's

Reviewer: This is actually not true right? Since we do truncation before applying filters. I don't think filters will help.

``warnings`` module.

> Finished Resources

Reviewer 2: Finished is a bit confusing... maybe just name it garbage collected?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Depending on the lifecycle of the resources, some "finished" resources are not accessible
through the APIs because they are already garbage collected.
**It is recommended not to rely on this API to obtain correct information on finished resources**.
For example, Ray periodically garbage collects DEAD state actor data to reduce memory usage.
Or it cleans up the FINISHED state of tasks when its lineage goes out of scope.

> .. toctree::

Reviewer: This looks weird though. Should we just promote this to a top level header?  
<img width="932" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11676094/180501593-5e06f24d-4be0-41a2-a85d-6c83c933f36c.png">
